FLIP: Capability Controllers (#798)
onflow/flow: flips/20220203-capability-controllers.md

The following is a quick refresher of the current state of the Capabilities API (from the [flow doc site](https://docs.onflow.org/cadence/language/capability-based-access-control)).

### Example Resource definition

In the following examples let's assume that the following interface and resource type that implements the interface are defined.

```cadence
pub resource interface HasCount {
   pub count: Int
}

pub resource Counter: HasCount {
   pub var count: Int

   pub init(count: Int) {
       self.count = count
   }
}
```

> The _issuer_ (`AuthAccount`) has also created an instance of this resource and saved it in its private storage.
> 
> ```cadence
> AuthAccount.save(<-create Counter(count: 42), to: /storage/counter)
> ```

Reviewer: This code is not valid, `AuthAccount` is a built-in type with a built-in constructor function of the same name.
Code examples below also refer to `authAccount`, which is maybe the same? 

Instead of naming the variable after what type it has, name it after the role / function, e.g. `issuer`

```suggestion
The _issuer_, `issuer` of type `AuthAccount`, has also created an instance of this resource and saved it in its private storage.

```cadence
AuthAccount.save(<-create Counter(count: 42), to: /storage/counter)
```
```

Reviewer 2: `issuer.save(<-create Counter(count: 42), to: /storage/counter)` it should be I guess

### Public Capabilities

To allow anyone (read) access to the `count` field on the counter, the _issuer_ needs to create a public typed link at a chosen path that points to their stored counter resource.

```cadence
AuthAccount.link<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount, target: /storage/counter)
```

Anyone can now read the `count` of the counter resource via the `HasCount` interface. This can be done by

- getting the `PublicAccount` object of the issuer (using the issuers address),
- then getting a typed capability from the chosen path,
- then finally calling borrow on that capability to get a reference to the instance of the counter (constrained by the `HasCount` interface)

```cadence
let publicAccount = getAccount(issuerAddress)
let countCap = publicAccount.getCapability<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)
let countRef = countCap.borrow()!
countRef.count
```

### Private Capabilities

To allow only certain accounts/resources (read) access to the `count` field on the counter, the _issuer_ needs to create a private typed link at a chosen path that points to their stored counter resource.

```cadence

> AuthAccount.link<&{HasCount}>(/private/hasCount, target: /storage/counter)

Reviewer: See comment above

```suggestion
issuer.link<&{HasCount}>(/private/hasCount, target: /storage/counter)
```

```

The receiving party needs to offer a public way to receive `&{HasCount}` capabilities.

```cadence
// this would probably be defined on the same contract as `HasCount`
pub resource interface HasCountReceiverPublic {
   pub fun addCapability(cap: Capability<&{HasCount}>)
}

pub resource HasCountReceiver: HasCountReceiverPublic {

   pub var hasCountCapability: Capability<&{HasCount}>?

   init() {
       self.hasCountCapability = nil
   }

   pub fun addCapability(cap: Capability<&{HasCount}>) {
       self.hasCountCapability = cap
   }
}

//...
// this is the receiver account setup
let hasCountReceiver <- HasCountReceiver()

receivingPartyAuthAccount.save(<-hasCountReceiver, to: /storage/hasCountReceiver)
receivingPartyAuthAccount.link<&{HasCountReceiverPublic}>(/public/hasCountReceiver,
   target: /storage/hasCountReceive)
```

With this in place the _issuer_ can create a capability from its private link and send it to this receiver.

```cadence

> let countCap = authAccount.getCapability<&{HasCount}>(/private/hasCount)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let countCap = issuer.getCapability<&{HasCount}>(/private/hasCount)
```

let publicAccount = getAccount(receivingPartyAddress)
let countReceiverCap = publicAccount.getCapability<&{HasCountReceiverPublic}>(/public/hasCountReceiver)
let countReceiverRef = countCap.borrow()!
countRef.addCapability(cap: countCap)
```

The receiving party can then use this capability when they wish.

### Capability API requirements

There are two requirements of the capability system that must be satisfied.

- **Revocation**: Any capability must be revocable by the issuer.
- **Redirection**: The issuer should have the ability to redirect the capability to a different (compatible) object.

Revocation can be currently done by using the `unlink` function.

> In the public example this would mean calling `authAccount.unlink<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)` which would invalidate (break) all capabilities created from this public path (both those created before unlink was called and those created after unlink was called).
> 
> In the private example the call would change to `authAccount.unlink<&{HasCount}>(/private/hasCount)`. It is important to note that if the issuer wants to have the ability to revoke/redirect capabilities in a more granular way (instead of doing them all at once), the solution is to create multiple private linked paths (e.g. `/private/hasCountAlice`, `/private/hasCountBob`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the public example this would mean calling `issuer.unlink<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)` which would invalidate (break) all capabilities created from this public path (both those created before unlink was called and those created after unlink was called).

In the private example the call would change to `issuer.unlink<&{HasCount}>(/private/hasCount)`. It is important to note that if the issuer wants to have the ability to revoke/redirect capabilities in a more granular way (instead of doing them all at once), the solution is to create multiple private linked paths (e.g. `/private/hasCountAlice`, `/private/hasCountBob`).
```

```cadence
let publicAccount = getAccount(issuerAddress)
let countCap = publicAccount.borrowCapability<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)!
countRef.count
```

### Capability Controllers (CapCons)

Each Capability would have an associated CapCon that would be created together with the Capability (Capabilities and Capability Controllers are in a 1 to 1 relation). The data associated with CapCons would be stored in arrays, so that each storage path on an account has an array of CapCons of Capabilities issued from that storage path.

CapCons are a non-storable object.

Capabilities also have an address field and a target field. The target field is the storage path of the targeted object. Creating a capability from a capability should be illegal.

The definition of the `CapabilityController` .

```cadence
// CapabilityController can be retrieved via:
// - authAccount.getControllers(path: StoragePath): [CapabilityController]
// - authAccount.getController(capabilityId: UInt64): CapabilityController?
struct CapabilityController {
   // The block height when the capability was created.
   let issueHeight: UInt64
   // The id of the related capability

>    // This is the UUiD of the created capability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   // This is the UUID of the created capability
```

>    let capabilityId: UInt64

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   let capabilityID: UInt64
```

   fun target(): StoragePath
   // Revoke the capability.
   // Returns true if successfully revoked.
   fun revoke(): Bool
   // Restore the capability.
   // Returns true if successfully restored.
   fun restore(): Bool
   // Retarget the capability.
   // Returns if successfully restored.
   // This would move the CapCon from one CapCon array to another
   fun retarget(target: StoragePath): Bool
}
```

The auth account would get new methods to get CapCons in order to manage capabilities:

```cadence
// Get all capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path
fun getControllers(path: StoragePath): [CapabilityController]
// Get capability controller for capability with the specified id
// If the id does not reference an existing capability
// or the capability does not target a storage path on this address, return nil
fun getController(capabilityId: UInt64): CapabilityController?
```

Some methods would be removed from the AuthAccount object as they are no longer needed:

```cadence
fun link<T: &Any>(_ newCapabilityPath: CapabilityPath, target: Path): Capability<T>?
fun getLinkTarget(_ path: CapabilityPath): Path?
fun unlink(_ path: CapabilityPath)
```

> The method `getCapability` would be renamed to `issueCapability `to reflect the fact that a new capability is created every time.

Reviewer: As noted by @aishairzay, we maybe want to consider adding a function that allows issuing a capability by providing a run-time type

Dan could also have a reference to the capability B (&B), but in this case Dan knows that his capability is just a reference, and that if B is revoked it makes sense that his reference to B also stops working.

### Accounts public domain as a capability storage

This part of the change proposes that accounts can store capabilities in their public domain. Capabilities would be borrowed by anyone that needs to use them. The `borrowCapability `method would be added to the PublicAccount which would be equivalent to borrowing the capability then calling borrow on it.

```cadence
let publicAccount = getAccount(issuerAddress)
let countCap = publicAccount.borrowCapability<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)!
countRef.count
```

### Capability Controllers (CapCons)

Each Capability would have an associated CapCon that would be created together with the Capability (Capabilities and Capability Controllers are in a 1 to 1 relation). The data associated with CapCons would be stored in arrays, so that each storage path on an account has an array of CapCons of Capabilities issued from that storage path.

> CapCons are a non-storable object.

Reviewer 3: I think the meaning here is that the `capCon` is not stored you get it from the capability? Non-storable things cannot be stored at all, like references and function variables.

> # Capability controllers
> 
> | Status        | Proposed                                           |
> | :------------ | :------------------------------------------------- |
> | **FLIP #**    | [798](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/798)     |
> | **Author(s)** | Janez Podhostnik (janez.podhostnik@dapperlabs.com) |
> | **Updated**   | 2022-08-22                                         |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 status: Proposed
| flip: [798](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/798)
| author: Janez Podhostnik (janez.podhostnik@dapperlabs.com)
| updated: 2022-08-22

# Capability controllers
```

Reviewer 4: This info section format should be that of Frontmatter, so that it can be parsed by markdown parses and used for automation, e.g. it can be included in the docs site.

Author: addressed

The following is a quick refresher of the current state of the Capabilities API (from the [flow doc site](https://docs.onflow.org/cadence/language/capability-based-access-control)).

### Example Resource definition

In the following examples let's assume that the following interface and resource type that implements the interface are defined.

```cadence
pub resource interface HasCount {
   pub count: Int
}

pub resource Counter: HasCount {
   pub var count: Int

   pub init(count: Int) {
       self.count = count
   }
}
```

The _issuer_ (`AuthAccount`) has also created an instance of this resource and saved it in its private storage.

```cadence
issuer.save(<-create Counter(count: 42), to: /storage/counter)
```

### Public Capabilities

> To allow anyone (read) access to the `count` field on the counter, the _issuer_ needs to create a public typed link at a chosen path that points to their stored counter resource.

Reviewer 3: This is not 100% accurate. You can use `getAuthAccount` in a script and borrow this from storate and read the value without having a public capability. 

You cannot do so in transactions though.

Reviewer 2: I think eventually we need to introduce similar functionality to transactions too

| status: Proposed
| flip: [798](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/798)
| author: Janez Podhostnik (janez.podhostnik@dapperlabs.com)
| updated: 2022-10-18

# Capability controllers

## Preface

> Cadence encourages a [capability-based security](d be clearer to Charlie that he received a capability t) model as described on the Flow [doc site](https://docs.onflow.org/cadence/language/capability-based-access-control). Capabilities are themselves a new concept that most Cadence programmers need to understand, but the API for syntax around Capabilities (especially the notion of “links” and “linking”), and the associated concepts of the public and private storage domains, lead to Capabilities being even more confusing and awkward to use. This proposal suggests that we could get rid of links entirely, and replace them with Capability Controllers (henceforth referred to as CapCons) which could make Capabilities easier to understand, and easier to work with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cadence encourages a [capability-based security](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capability-based_security) model as described on the Flow [doc site](https://docs.onflow.org/cadence/language/capability-based-access-control). Capabilities are themselves a new concept that most Cadence programmers need to understand, but the API for syntax around Capabilities (especially the notion of “links” and “linking”), and the associated concepts of the public and private storage domains, lead to Capabilities being even more confusing and awkward to use. This proposal suggests that we could get rid of links entirely, and replace them with Capability Controllers (henceforth referred to as CapCons) which could make Capabilities easier to understand, and easier to work with.
```

### Capability Controllers (CapCons)

Each Capability would have an associated CapCon that would be created together with the Capability (Capabilities and Capability Controllers are in a 1 to 1 relation). The data associated with CapCons would be stored in arrays, so that each storage path on an account has an array of CapCons of Capabilities issued from that storage path.

CapCons are a non-storable object.

Capabilities also have an address field and a target field. The target field is the storage path of the targeted object. Creating a capability from a capability should be illegal.

The definition of the `CapabilityController` .

```cadence
// CapabilityController can be retrieved via:
// - AuthAccount::getControllers(path: StoragePath): [CapabilityController]
// - AuthAccount::getController(capabilityID: UInt64): CapabilityController?
struct CapabilityController {
   // The block height when the capability was created.
   let issueHeight: UInt64
   // The Type of the capability.
   let CapabilityType: Type
   // The id of the related capability.
   // This is the UUID of the created capability.
   let capabilityID: UInt64

   // Is the capability revoked.

>    fun isRevoked(): Bool

Reviewer: This could just be a field

```suggestion
   let isRevoked: Bool
```

   // The target storage path.
   fun target(): StoragePath
   // Revoke the capability.

>    fun revoke()

Reviewer: It would be great if the proposal could describe the behaviour of revokation in more detail

   // Retarget the capability.
   // This would move the CapCon from one CapCon array to another.
   // If the new target is not a valid target this will panic.
   fun retarget(target: StoragePath)
}
```

> The auth account would get new methods to get CapCons in order to manage capabilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `AuthAccount` would get new methods to get CapCons in order to manage capabilities:
```

```cadence
// Get all capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path

> fun getControllers(path: StoragePath): [CapabilityController]

Author: Is it better to have both, or to just have the iterator?

> fun getControllers(path: StoragePath): [CapabilityController]

Reviewer 2: > Is it better to have both, or to just have the iterator?

I think there is no good answer for this.

// Get capability controller for capability with the specified id
// If the id does not reference an existing capability
// or the capability does not target a storage path on this address, return nil
fun getController(capabilityID: UInt64): CapabilityController?
```

Some methods would be removed from the `AuthAccount` object as they are no longer needed:

```cadence
fun link<T: &Any>(_ newCapabilityPath: CapabilityPath, target: Path): Capability<T>?
fun getLinkTarget(_ path: CapabilityPath): Path?
fun unlink(_ path: CapabilityPath)
```

The method `getCapability` would be renamed to `issueCapability `to reflect the fact that a new capability is created every time.

And also from the PublicAccount:

```cadence
fun getCapability<T>(_ path: PublicPath): Capability<T>
fun getLinkTarget(_ path: CapabilityPath): Path?
```

This would remove all references to `Link`s.

### Borrow Capability

> . The `borrowCapability `method would be added to the PublicAccount which would be a shorthand to how we currently get the capability then call `borrow` on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `borrowCapability` method would be added to the PublicAccount which would be a shorthand to how we currently get the capability then call `borrow` on it.
```

```cadence
// this:

var publicAccount = getAccount(issuerAddress)

> var cap = getCapability<&{CounterContract.HasCount}>(/public/counter)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
var cap = publicAccount.getCapability<&{CounterContract.HasCount}>(/public/counter)
```

var countCap = cap.borrow()!
countCap.count

// become this:

let publicAccount = getAccount(issuerAddress)

> let countCap = publicAccount.borrowCapability<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)!

Reviewer 5: As I understood the methods, I thought this would be either

```
let countCap: Capability<&{HasCount}> = publicAccount.issueCapability<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)!
```

or

```
let countRef: &AnyResource{HasCount} = publicAccount.borrowCapability<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)!
```

Reviewer: @sisyphusSmiling Agreed, that is probably a typo:

```suggestion
let countRef = publicAccount.borrowCapability<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)!
```

#### Pet names for issued capabilities

If needed the `account.getCapability<T>(path)` can be wrapped into a smart contract function, so that the issuer can more easily keep track of what was issued.

```cadence
// inside the Counter contract
access(account) petNames: {String; UInt64}

access(account) issueHasCount(petName: String): Capability<&{HasCount}> {
   // for brevity this function is not handling pet name collision
   let cap = self.account.issueCapability<&{HasCount}>(/storage/counter)
   self.petNames[petName] = cap.capabilityID
   return cap
}
```

This allows the account to later access `petNames` when it needs to revoke/retarget a specific capability. This can also be used not just for pet names, but to add other metadata to issued capabilities.

#### Capability Minters

In certain situations it is required that an issuer delegates issuing and revoking capabilities to someone else. In this case the following approach can be used.

Let's assume that the issuer defined an `AdminInterface` resource interface and a `Main` resource (besides the `Counter` and `HasCount` from previous examples).

```cadence

> public resource interface AdminInterface {
>    fun createCountCap(): Capability<&{HasCount}>
>    fun revokeCountCap(capabilityID: UInt64): Bool
> }
> public resource Main : AdminInterface {

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
pub resource interface AdminInterface {
   fun createCountCap(): Capability<&{HasCount}>
   fun revokeCountCap(capabilityID: UInt64): Bool
}
pub resource Main : AdminInterface {
```

   fun createCountCap(): Capability<&{HasCount}> {
       return self.account.getCapability<&{HasCount}>(/storage/counter)
   }

   fun revokeCountCap(capabilityID: UInt64) {
      if let capCon = self.account.getController(capabilityID: capabilityID) {
         if capCon.Type != Type<&{HasCount}>() {
            return false // we have only delegated the issuance/revocation of &{HasCount} capabilities
         }
         capCon.revoke()
      }
   }
}
```

The issuer can then store a `Main` resource in their storage and give the capability to call it to a trusted party. The trusted party can then create and revoke `&{HasCount}` capabilities at will.

```cadence
issuer.save(<-create Main(), to: /storage/counterMinter)
let countMinterCap <- issuer.getCapability(/storage/counterMinter)
countMinterCap //give this to a trusted party
```

> It is worth noting that every time the `AdminInterface` is used a CapCon is created in the issuers storage taking up some resources. Revoking capabilities does not free any storage.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
It is worth noting that every time the `AdminInterface` is used, a CapCon is created in the issuer's storage, taking up some resources. Therefore revoking capabilities does not free any storage.
```

In this example the delegatee with the `Capability<&{AdminInterface}>` can revoke any capability of type `&{HasCount}` even those that someone else created. This is sometimes desired (IT admins with the capability to issue purchase_hardware capabilities should have the ability to revoke what other IT admins issued), but sometimes we would like the delegatee to only revoke what it issued. If that is the case, another resource can be created `ScopedMain` that serves to limit which capabilities can be revoked.

```cadence

> public resource ScopedMain : AdminInterface {
>    public delegatorTag: String
>    public inner: Capability<&{AdminInterface}>
>    public issued: {UInt64:Bool}
> 
>    public init(inner: Capability<&{AdminInterface}>, delegatorTag: String) {

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
pub resource ScopedMain : AdminInterface {
   pub delegatorTag: String
   pub inner: Capability<&{AdminInterface}>
   pub issued: {UInt64:Bool}

   pub init(inner: Capability<&{AdminInterface}>, delegatorTag: String) {
```

      self.delegatorTag = delegatorTag
      self.inner = inner
      self.issued = {}
   }

   fun createCountCap(): Capability<&{HasCount}> {
      let capability = self.inner.createCountCap()
      self.issued[capability.capabilityID] = true
      return capability
   }

   fun revokeCountCap(capabilityID: UInt64) {
      if self.issued.containsKey(capabilityID) {
         self.issued.remove(key: capabilityID)
         self.inner.revokeCountCap()
      }
   }
}
```

## Deployment options

> Just making a breaking change by removing the linking API and adding the CapCons API might cause some headaches. In order to make the transition to CapCons smother, the CapCons API could temporarily work in parallel with the current linking API.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Just making a breaking change by removing the linking API and adding the CapCons API might cause some headaches. In order to make the transition to CapCons smoother, the CapCons API could temporarily work in parallel with the current linking API.
```

The rollout process would have 2 steps:

1. Add CapCons and still have linking.
2. After a transition period remove linking.

> To make this FLIP compatible with this rollout, the requirement to removing the private domain needs to be addressed While both APIs are still active, the private domain still needs to exist in order to do private linking for private capabilities. The private domain can be removed at step 2.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
To make this FLIP compatible with this rollout, the requirement of removing the private domain needs to be addressed. While both APIs are still active, the private domain still needs to exist in order to do private linking for private capabilities. The private domain can be removed at step 2.
```

> During step 1. all existing links should also become CapCons (most likely with a storage migration). The linking API will still be available, but will actually operate with CapCons in the background. Below is a implementation of the linking API with the CapCons API.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
During step 1, all existing links should also become CapCons (most likely with a storage migration). The linking API will still be available but will actually operate with CapCons in the background. Below is an implementation of the linking API with the CapCons API.
```

```cadence
// link
// issuer.link<T>(publicOrPrivatePath, target: storagePath)

let cap = issuer.issueCapability<T>(storagePath)
issuer.save(cap, to: publicOrPrivatePath)
```

```cadence 
// unlink
// issuer.unlink(publicOrPrivatePath)

let cap = issuer.getCapability<T>(publicOrPrivatePath)
let capabilityID = cap.capabilityID
let capCon = issuer.getController(capabilityID: capabilityID)

capCon.revoke()
```

```cadence
// relink
// issuer.unlink(publicOrPrivatePath)
// issuer.link<&{CounterContract.HasCount}>(publicOrPrivatePath, target: storagePath2)

// 1. unlink

let cap = issuer.getCapability<T>(publicOrPrivatePath)
let capabilityID = cap.capabilityID
let capCon = issuer.getController(capabilityID: capabilityID)

capCon.revoke()

// 2. link

let cap = issuer.issueCapability<T>(storagePath2)
issuer.save(cap, to: publicOrPrivatePath)
```

## Issues not addressed in this FLIP

### Unexpected revocation

> If the issuer creates a capability **A** and gives it to Alice and creates a capability **B** and gives it to Bob. Alice then copies her capability creating **A'** and gives it to Charlie, creating the following situation:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Let's say the issuer creates a capability **A** and gives it to Alice then creates a capability **B** and gives it to Bob. Alice then copies her capability creating **A'** and gives it to Charlie, creating the following situation:
```

- Alice: has **A**
- Bob: has **B**
- Charlie: has **A'**

If the issuer decides to revoke **B**, Bob will no longer be able to use his capability. If the issuer revokes **A** Alice will not be able to use her capability, but perhaps unexpected to Charlie, he will also not be able to use **A'**.

> Addressing this issue so that it would be clearer to Charlie that he received a capability that is a copy of Alice's, and not his own instance is not in the scope of this FLIP. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Addressing this issue so that it would be clearer to Charlie that he received a capability that is a copy of Alice's, and not his own instance, is not in the scope of this FLIP. 
```

- Removing (or abstracting away) the concept of links.
- Making it easier to create new capabilities (with individual links).
- Offering a way to iterate through capabilities on a storage path.
- Removing the need to have a `/private` domain.
- Introducing Capability Controllers (CapCons) that handle management of capabilities.

### Capability Controllers (CapCons)

Each Capability would have an associated CapCon that would be responsible for managing the Capability. The CapCon would be created when the Capability is issued (created). If the Capability is copied (since it is a value type) it shares the CapCon with the original (i.e.: calling revoke on the CapCon revokes all copies of the associated capability).

The data associated with CapCons would be stored in arrays, so that each storage path on an account has an array of CapCons of Capabilities issued from that storage path. CapCons are a non-storable object (similar to AuthAccounts).

The definition of the `CapabilityController`.

```cadence
struct CapabilityController {
   // The block height when the capability was created.
   let issueHeight: UInt64
   // The Type of the capability.

>    let capabilityType: Type

Reviewer: Maybe we can make the name more descriptive? The type indicates how the capability can be borrowed – maybe `borrowType`? This is what we already use internally in the Cadence implementation.

Also, maybe this field should be mutable? One problem that came up before that changing how something in storage can be borrowed requires removing the link and re-linking.

Author: borrowType sounds better. I will edit that.

Not sure about mutability. Changing the borrowType on the CapCon would also mean that the existing capabilities now use a different borrow type... not sure if that is ok. I also think this might be an addition that can be made later.

Reviewer: Good point, agreed!

   // The id of the related capability.
   // This is the UUID of the created capability.
   // All copies of the same capability will have the same UUID
   let capabilityID: UInt64
   // Is the capability revoked.
   let isRevoked: Bool

   // Returns the targeted storage path of the capability.
   fun target(): StoragePath
   // Revoke the capability making it no longer usable.
   // When borrowing from a revoked capability the borrow returns nil.
   fun revoke()
   // Retarget the capability.
   // This moves the CapCon from one CapCon array to another.
   // If the new target is not a valid target this will panic.
   fun retarget(target: StoragePath)

> }

Reviewer: As proposed by @bluesign:

```suggestion

    fun getCapability<T>(): Capability<T>?
}
```

```

The capability related methods in the `AuthAccount` and in the `PublicAccount` would be moved to a `capabilities` namespace, similar to how the contract methods are in the [contracts namespace](https://developers.flow.com/cadence/language/accounts).

The `AuthAccount` would get new methods to create or get or iterate through capabilities and to get or iterate through CapCons in order to manage capabilities. Methods used for (un)linking would be removed as they are no longer needed.

```cadence
struct AuthAccount {
   // ...
   // removed: fun link<T: &Any>(_ newCapabilityPath: CapabilityPath, target: Path): Capability<T>?
   // removed: fun getLinkTarget(_ path: CapabilityPath): Path?
   // removed: fun unlink(_ path: CapabilityPath)
   // moved & renamed: fun getCapability<T>(_ path: CapabilityPath): Capability<T>
   // moved & renamed: fun forEachPublic(_ function: ((PublicPath, Type): Bool))
   let capabilities: AuthAccount.Capabilities
   struct Capabilities {
      // get returns the capability at the public path, if one was stored there.

>       fun get<T>(_ path: PublicPath): Capability<T>?

Reviewer: Another thing I noticed while going over the existing API and the new one:
`link` has a type parameter `<T: &Any>`, i.e. the type parameter has a type bound `&Any`, which basically expresses that type arguments for must be a reference type.
We should maybe have the same requirements for `get`, `borrow`, and `issue`.

While at it, we could maybe also add that type bound to `Capability<T>`?

```cadence
pub resource interface AdminInterface {
   fun createCountCap(): Capability<&{HasCount}>
   fun revokeCountCap(capabilityID: UInt64): Bool
}
pub resource Main : AdminInterface {
   fun createCountCap(): Capability<&{HasCount}> {
       return self.account.capabilities.issue<&{HasCount}>(/storage/counter)
   }

   fun revokeCountCap(capabilityID: UInt64) {
      if let capCon = self.account.capabilities.getController(byCapabilityID: capabilityID) {
         if capCon.Type != Type<&{HasCount}>() {
            return false // we have only delegated the issuance/revocation of &{HasCount} capabilities
         }
         capCon.revoke()
      }
   }
}
```

The issuer can then store a `Main` resource in their storage and give the capability to call it to a trusted party. The trusted party can then create and revoke `&{HasCount}` capabilities at will.

```cadence
issuer.save(<-create Main(), to: /storage/counterMinter)
let countMinterCap <- issuer.capabilities.issue<&{AdminInterface}>(/storage/counterMinter)
countMinterCap // give this to a trusted party
```

> It is worth noting that every time the `AdminInterface` is used, a CapCon is created in the issuer's storage, taking up some resources. Therefore revoking capabilities does not free any storage.

Reviewer 5: On the note of storage used by CapCons, my understanding is that CapCons remain even after revocation of their associated Capability. Is there a reason why we wouldn't to expose the ability to delete CapCons from the AuthAccount once revoked?

Author: That might be a remnant from where it was possible to un-revoke a capability controller. 

Since that is no longer possible there is little reason to keep the CapCon alive after revocation.

Possible reasons would be:
- easier to handle capability logic if CapCon is always present (Capability has to check cap con "Revoked" field before use)
- easier for users to find previously issued capabilities if needed

Maybe its best if CapCons can be deleted and the logic is: 
- if there is no capcon for the capability the capability is considered revoked
- revoking the capcon does not automatically delete it

I definitely agree it would be great to be able to recover the storage space.

Any thoughts?

The capability related methods in the `AuthAccount` and in the `PublicAccount` would be moved to a `capabilities` namespace, similar to how the contract methods are in the [contracts namespace](https://developers.flow.com/cadence/language/accounts).

The `AuthAccount` would get new methods to create or get or iterate through capabilities and to get or iterate through CapCons in order to manage capabilities. Methods used for (un)linking would be removed as they are no longer needed.

```cadence
struct AuthAccount {
   // ...
   // removed: fun link<T: &Any>(_ newCapabilityPath: CapabilityPath, target: Path): Capability<T>?
   // removed: fun getLinkTarget(_ path: CapabilityPath): Path?
   // removed: fun unlink(_ path: CapabilityPath)
   // moved & renamed: fun getCapability<T>(_ path: CapabilityPath): Capability<T>
   // moved & renamed: fun forEachPublic(_ function: ((PublicPath, Type): Bool))
   let capabilities: AuthAccount.Capabilities
   struct Capabilities {
      // get returns the capability at the public path, if one was stored there.
      fun get<T>(_ path: PublicPath): Capability<T>?

>       // borrow is equivalent to `get(path)!.borrow()` if `get(path)` exists `nil` otherwise

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // borrow gets the capability at the given path, and borrows the capability if it exists.
      // Returns `nil` if the capability does not exist or cannot be borrowed using the given type.
      // The function is equivalent to `get(path)?.borrow()`.
```

      fun borrow<T>(_ path: PublicPath): T?
      // For each iterates through all the public capabilities of the public account.
      // If function returns false, the iteration ends.
      fun forEach(_ function: ((PublicPath, Type): Bool))

      // Get capability controller for capability with the specified id
      // If the id does not reference an existing capability
      // or the capability does not target a storage path on this address, return nil

>       fun getController(byCapabilityID: UInt64): CapabilityController?

Reviewer 7: Given `CapabilityController` is a value, it can be copied. Would that be an issue to have multiple CapCons to a single Capability?
For e.g: Say `capConCopy` is a copy of `capCon`, and if someone calls `capCon.revoke()`, then it would also need to update the `capConCopy.isRevoked` field as well.

So, wouldn't it be better to return a reference to the `CapabilityController` instead of the value itself?

Reviewer: See https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/798#issuecomment-1324705992 and https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/798#issuecomment-1325283451. 

Though I agree with you and @bluesign that cap cons are references, I still feel like it would be nice to keep the API simple, and don't "burden" users with this detail. We do this already today for e.g. `AuthAccount`.

Reviewer 7: Sorry, this wen't completely out of my radar.

> I still feel like it would be nice to keep the API simple, and don't "burden" users with this detail.

How would a reference make the API complex? Let's say we return a reference as a CapCon, then users will only use it to access fields, and call functions on it. So the code they would write is exactly the same as using a non-reference struct value. Is there anything else they would want to do with the CapCon like storing/moving etc? (pretty much agree with @bluesign on https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/798#issuecomment-1325342206)

As a dev, it would make me feel a bit confused if some structs behave as value types while some behave like references. Yes, we may have done it for AuthAccount but I think it would be bad to spread that behavior to other types as well (and going one step further, maybe also fix it in AuthAccount! But it'll be hard to undo)

Reviewer: This concern has been addressed, see below: It was decided to return references

      // Get all capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path
      fun getControllers(forPath: StoragePath): [CapabilityController]

      // Iterate through all capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path.
      // Returning false from the function stops the iteration.
      fun forEachController(forPath: StoragePath, function: ((CapabilityController): Bool))

      // Issue/create a new capability.
      fun issue<T>(_ path: StoragePath): Capability<T>
   }
}
```

The `PublicAccount` would get similar changes, but only for capabilities, as CapCons are not meant to be accessible outside of `AuthAccount`.

```cadence
struct PublicAccount {
   // ...
   // removed: fun getCapability<T>(_ path: PublicPath): Capability<T> 
   // removed: fun getLinkTarget(_ path: CapabilityPath): Path?
   // removed: fun forEachPublic(_ function: ((PublicPath, Type): Bool))

   let capabilities: PublicAccount.Capabilities
   struct Capabilities {
      // get returns the capability at the public path, if one was stored there.
      fun get<T>(_ path: PublicPath): Capability<T>?

>       // borrow is equivalent to `get(path)!.borrow()` if `get(path)` exists `nil` otherwise

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // borrow gets the capability at the given path, and borrows the capability if it exists.
      // Returns `nil` if the capability does not exist or cannot be borrowed using the given type.
      // The function is equivalent to `get(path)?.borrow()`.
```

   let cap = self.account.capabilities.issue<&{HasCount}>(/storage/counter)
   self.petNames[petName] = cap.capabilityID
   return cap
}
```

This allows the account to later access `petNames` when it needs to revoke/retarget a specific capability. This can also be used not just for pet names, but to add other metadata to issued capabilities.

#### Capability Minters

In certain situations it is required that an issuer delegates issuing and revoking capabilities to someone else. In this case the following approach can be used.

Let's assume that the issuer defined an `AdminInterface` resource interface and a `Main` resource (besides the `Counter` and `HasCount` from previous examples).

```cadence
pub resource interface AdminInterface {
   fun createCountCap(): Capability<&{HasCount}>
   fun revokeCountCap(capabilityID: UInt64): Bool
}
pub resource Main : AdminInterface {
   fun createCountCap(): Capability<&{HasCount}> {
       return self.account.capabilities.issue<&{HasCount}>(/storage/counter)
   }

   fun revokeCountCap(capabilityID: UInt64) {
      if let capCon = self.account.capabilities.getController(byCapabilityID: capabilityID) {

>          if capCon.Type != Type<&{HasCount}>() {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         if capCon.borrowType != Type<&{HasCount}>() {
```

Also, should this rather be a subtype check?

    }

    pub fun addCapability(cap: Capability<&{HasCount}>) {
        self.hasCountCapability = cap
    }
}

//...
// this is the receiver account setup
let hasCountReceiver <- HasCountReceiver()

receivingParty.save(<-hasCountReceiver, to: /storage/hasCountReceiver)
receivingParty.link<&{HasCountReceiverPublic}>(
    /public/hasCountReceiver,
    target: /storage/hasCountReceive
)
```

With this in place the _issuer_ can create a capability from its private link and send it to this receiver.

```cadence
let countCap = issuer.getCapability<&{HasCount}>(/private/hasCount)

let publicAccount = getAccount(receivingPartyAddress)
let countReceiverCap = publicAccount.getCapability<&{HasCountReceiverPublic}>(/public/hasCountReceiver)
let countReceiverRef = countCap.borrow()!
countRef.addCapability(cap: countCap)
```

The receiving party can then use this capability when they wish.

### Capability API requirements

There are two requirements of the capability system that must be satisfied.

- **Revocation**: Any capability must be revocable by the issuer.
- **Redirection**: The issuer should have the ability to redirect the capability to a different (compatible) object.

> Revocation can be currently done by using the `unlink` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Capabilities can currently be revoked by using the `unlink` function.
```

- Issuing and managing private capabilities that can be revoked at a granular level, 
  by creating a custom private linked path for each capability, is difficult.

- Unless the path name includes some hints, there is no way to know when a path was created, 
  thus making it more difficult to remember why a certain capability was issued.

- If an old path (that has been unlinked) is accidentally reused and re-linked, 
  this will revive a capability that is supposed to be revoked.

## Suggested change

The suggested change addresses these pain points by:

- Removing (or abstracting away) the concept of links.
- Making it easier to create new capabilities (with individual links).
- Offering a way to iterate through capabilities on a storage path.
- Removing the need to have a `/private` domain.
- Introducing Capability Controllers (CapCons) that handle management of capabilities.

### Capability Controllers (CapCons)

Each Capability would have an associated CapCon that would be responsible for managing the Capability. 
The CapCon would be created when the Capability is issued (created). 
If the Capability is copied (since it is a value type) it shares the CapCon with the original 

> (i.e., calling revoke on the CapCon revokes all copies of the associated capability).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(i.e., calling `delete` on the CapCon revokes all copies of the associated capability).
```

A CapCon and all the copies of the Capability that CapCon controls would have the same ID.
Capability/CapCon ids are unique per account.   

The data associated with CapCons would be stored in arrays, 
so that each storage path on an account has an array of CapCons of Capabilities issued from that storage path. 
CapCons are a non-storable object (similar to AuthAccounts).

The definition of the `CapabilityController`.

```cadence
struct CapabilityController {

>     /// The block height when the capability was created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// The block height when the controlled capability was created.
```

    let issueHeight: UInt64
   

>     /// The Type of the capability, i.e.: the T in Capability<T>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// The type of the controlled capability, i.e. the T in `Capability<T>`.
```

    let borrowType: Type
   

>     /// The id of the related capability.
>     /// This is the ID of the created capability.
>     /// All copies of the same capability will have the same ID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// The identifier of the controlled capability.
    /// All copies of a capability have the same ID.
```

>     /// This is the UUID of the created capability.
>     /// All copies of the same capability will have the same UUID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// This is the ID of the created capability.
    /// All copies of the same capability will have the same ID
```

>     let capabilityID: UInt64

Reviewer 8: One thing to note is that UUIDs are 128-bit, not 64 as mentioned here. Capability ID's are account-local, so making them 64-bit shouldn't be an issue (i fear the person with 1.8e19 capabilities). Thoughts?

Reviewer: Good point! The "UUID" naming in comment is actually wrong, as pointed out by @dete a few times before for resource "UUID"s: they are not unique, but rather local to the chain. 

I'll update the comment

Reviewer: Fixed in [d3bfc4a](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/798/commits/d3bfc4a4de6e981c573b71983690797e87e63087)

>     /// Is the capability revoked.
>     let isRevoked: Bool
> 
>     /// Returns the targeted storage path of the capability.
>     fun target(): StoragePath
>    
>     /// Revoke the capability making it no longer usable.
>     /// When borrowing from a revoked capability the borrow returns nil.
>     fun revoke()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Returns the targeted storage path of the controlled capability.
    fun target(): StoragePath

    /// Delete this capability controller,
    /// and disable the controlled capability and its copies.
    ///
    /// The controller will be deleted from storage,
    /// but the controlled capability and its copies remain.
    ///
    /// Once this function returns, the controller is no longer usable,
    /// all further operations on the controller will panic.
    ///
    /// Borrowing from the controlled capability or its copies will return nil.
    ///
    fun delete()
```

    fun retarget(target: StoragePath)

}
```

Capabilities would expose the new field `let id: UInt64`, in addition to the account field they already expose.

The capability related methods in the `AuthAccount` and in the `PublicAccount` would be moved to a `capabilities` namespace, 
similar to how the contract methods are in the [contracts namespace](https://developers.flow.com/cadence/language/accounts).

The `AuthAccount` would get new methods to create or get or iterate through capabilities,
and to get or iterate through CapCons in order to manage capabilities. 
Methods used for (un)linking would be removed as they are no longer needed.

```cadence
struct AuthAccount {
    // ...
    // removed: fun link<T: &Any>(_ newCapabilityPath: CapabilityPath, target: Path): Capability<T>?
    // removed: fun getLinkTarget(_ path: CapabilityPath): Path?
    // removed: fun unlink(_ path: CapabilityPath)
    // moved & renamed: fun getCapability<T>(_ path: CapabilityPath): Capability<T>
    // moved & renamed: fun forEachPublic(_ function: ((PublicPath, Type): Bool))

    let capabilities: AuthAccount.Capabilities

    struct Capabilities {

>         /// get returns the capability at the public path, if one was stored there.
>         fun get<T>(_ path: PublicPath): Capability<T>?
> 
>         /// borrow gets the capability at the given path, and borrows the capability if it exists.
>         /// Returns `nil` if the capability does not exist or cannot be borrowed using the given type.
>         /// The function is equivalent to `get(path)?.borrow()`.
>         fun borrow<T>(_ path: PublicPath): T?
>  
>         /// For each iterates through all the public capabilities of the public account.
>         /// Returning false from the function stops the iteration.
>         fun forEach(_ function: ((PublicPath, Type): Bool))

Reviewer: Is there any reason the parameters for the functions changed from `CapabilityPath` (which can be either a public or private path) to just `PublicPath` (only public paths)?

Should the parameters be changed back to `CapabilityPath`?

```suggestion
        /// get returns the capability at the public path, if one was stored there.
        fun get<T>(_ path: CapabilityPath): Capability<T>?

        /// borrow gets the capability at the given path, and borrows the capability if it exists.
        /// Returns `nil` if the capability does not exist or cannot be borrowed using the given type.
        /// The function is equivalent to `get(path)?.borrow()`.
        fun borrow<T>(_ path: CapabilityPath): T?
 
        /// For each iterates through all the public capabilities of the public account.
        /// Returning false from the function stops the iteration.
        fun forEach(_ function: ((CapabilityPath, Type): Bool))
```

Author: The reason was that the FLIP also suggests removing the private storage path altogether.

Reviewer: Ah, I see, that makes sense. Regarding migrating existing uses of `CapabilityPath`: We can probably alias it to `PublicPath`?

Reviewer: Added this to the list of discussion points

        /// Get capability controller for capability with the specified id
        /// If the id does not reference an existing capability
        /// or the capability does not target a storage path on this address, return nil

>         fun getController(byCapabilityID: UInt64): CapabilityController?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        fun getController(byCapabilityID: UInt64): &CapabilityController?
```

        /// Get all capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path

>         fun getControllers(forPath: StoragePath): [CapabilityController]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        fun getControllers(forPath: StoragePath): [&CapabilityController]
```

        /// Iterate through all capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path.
        /// Returning false from the function stops the iteration.

>         fun forEachController(forPath: StoragePath, function: ((CapabilityController): Bool))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        fun forEachController(forPath: StoragePath, function: ((&CapabilityController): Bool))
```

}
```

This allows the account to later access `petNames` when it needs to revoke/retarget a specific capability. 
This can also be used not just for pet names, but to add other metadata to issued capabilities.

#### Capability Minters

In certain situations it is required that an issuer delegates issuing and revoking capabilities to someone else. 
In this case the following approach can be used.

Let's assume that the issuer defined an `AdminInterface` resource interface and a `Main` resource (besides the `Counter` and `HasCount` from previous examples).

```cadence
pub resource interface AdminInterface {
   fun createCountCap(): Capability<&{HasCount}>
   fun revokeCountCap(capabilityID: UInt64): Bool
}
pub resource Main : AdminInterface {
   fun createCountCap(): Capability<&{HasCount}> {
       return self.account.capabilities.issue<&{HasCount}>(/storage/counter)
   }

   fun revokeCountCap(capabilityID: UInt64) {
      if let capCon = self.account.capabilities.getController(byCapabilityID: capabilityID) {
         if capCon.borrowType != Type<&{HasCount}>() {
            return false // we have only delegated the issuance/revocation of &{HasCount} capabilities
         }

>          capCon.revoke()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         capCon.delete()
```

      }
   }
}
```

The issuer can then store a `Main` resource in their storage and give the capability to call it to a trusted party. 
The trusted party can then create and revoke `&{HasCount}` capabilities at will.

```cadence
issuer.save(<-create Main(), to: /storage/counterMinter)
let countMinterCap <- issuer.capabilities.issue<&{AdminInterface}>(/storage/counterMinter)
countMinterCap // give this to a trusted party
```

> It is worth noting that every time the `AdminInterface` is used, a CapCon is created in the issuer's storage, taking up some resources. 
> Therefore revoking capabilities does not free any storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is worth noting that every time the `AdminInterface` is used, a CapCon is created in the issuer's storage, taking up some storage space. 
Revoking a capability by deleting its controller frees up the storage for the controller, but not for the capability and its copies.
```

In order to make the transition to CapCons smoother, the CapCons API could temporarily work in parallel with the current linking API.

The rollout process would have 2 steps:

1. Add CapCons and still have linking.
2. After a transition period remove linking.

To make this FLIP compatible with this rollout, the requirement of removing the private domain needs to be addressed. 
While both APIs are still active, the private domain still needs to exist in order to do private linking for private capabilities. 
The private domain can be removed at step 2.

During step 1, all existing links should also become CapCons (most likely with a storage migration). 
The linking API will still be available, but will actually operate with CapCons in the background. 
Below is an implementation of the linking API with the CapCons API.

```cadence
// link
// issuer.link<T>(publicOrPrivatePath, target: storagePath)

let cap = issuer.capabilities.issue<T>(storagePath)
issuer.save(cap, to: publicOrPrivatePath)
```

```cadence
// unlink
// issuer.unlink(publicOrPrivatePath)

let cap = issuer.capabilities.get<T>(publicOrPrivatePath)!
let capCon = issuer.capabilities.getController(byCapabilityID: cap.id)

> capCon.revoke()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
capCon.delete()
```

```

```cadence
// relink
// issuer.unlink(publicOrPrivatePath)
// issuer.link<&{CounterContract.HasCount}>(publicOrPrivatePath, target: storagePath2)

// 1. unlink

let cap = issuer.capabilities.get<T>(publicOrPrivatePath)!
let capCon = issuer.capabilities.getController(byCapabilityID: cap.id)

> capCon.revoke()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
capCon.delete()
```

Capability/CapCon ids are unique per account.   

The data associated with CapCons would be stored in arrays, 
so that each storage path on an account has an array of CapCons of Capabilities issued from that storage path. 
CapCons are a non-storable object (similar to AuthAccounts).

The definition of the `CapabilityController`.

```cadence
struct CapabilityController {
    /// The block height when the capability was created.
    let issueHeight: UInt64
   
    /// The Type of the capability, i.e.: the T in Capability<T>.
    let borrowType: Type
   
    /// The id of the related capability.
    /// This is the UUID of the created capability.
    /// All copies of the same capability will have the same UUID
    let capabilityID: UInt64
   
    /// Is the capability revoked.
    let isRevoked: Bool

    /// Returns the targeted storage path of the capability.
    fun target(): StoragePath
   
    /// Revoke the capability making it no longer usable.
    /// When borrowing from a revoked capability the borrow returns nil.
    fun revoke()
   
    /// Retarget the capability.
    /// This moves the CapCon from one CapCon array to another.

>     /// If the new target is not a valid target this will panic.

Reviewer: Capabilities stay latent, as they are now

```suggestion
```

so that each storage path on an account has an array of CapCons of Capabilities issued from that storage path. 
CapCons are a non-storable object (similar to AuthAccounts).

The definition of the `CapabilityController`.

```cadence
struct CapabilityController {
    /// The block height when the capability was created.
    let issueHeight: UInt64
   
    /// The Type of the capability, i.e.: the T in Capability<T>.
    let borrowType: Type
   
    /// The id of the related capability.
    /// This is the UUID of the created capability.
    /// All copies of the same capability will have the same UUID
    let capabilityID: UInt64
   
    /// Is the capability revoked.
    let isRevoked: Bool

    /// Returns the targeted storage path of the capability.
    fun target(): StoragePath
   
    /// Revoke the capability making it no longer usable.
    /// When borrowing from a revoked capability the borrow returns nil.
    fun revoke()
   
    /// Retarget the capability.
    /// This moves the CapCon from one CapCon array to another.
    /// If the new target is not a valid target this will panic.
    fun retarget(target: StoragePath)

>     fun getCapability<T>(): Capability<T>?

Reviewer: Remove as discussed:

```suggestion
```

Capability/CapCon ids are unique per account.   

The data associated with CapCons would be stored in arrays, 
so that each storage path on an account has an array of CapCons of Capabilities issued from that storage path. 
CapCons are a non-storable object (similar to AuthAccounts).

The definition of the `CapabilityController`.

```cadence
struct CapabilityController {
    // The block height when the capability was created.
    let issueHeight: UInt64
   
    // The Type of the capability, i.e.: the T in Capability<T>.
    let borrowType: Type
   
    // The id of the related capability.
    // This is the UUID of the created capability.
    // All copies of the same capability will have the same UUID
    let capabilityID: UInt64
   
    // Is the capability revoked.
    let isRevoked: Bool

    // Returns the targeted storage path of the capability.
    fun target(): StoragePath
   
    // Revoke the capability making it no longer usable.
    // When borrowing from a revoked capability the borrow returns nil.
    fun revoke()
   
    // Retarget the capability.
    // This moves the CapCon from one CapCon array to another.

>     // If the new target is not a valid target this will panic.

Reviewer: When is a target path invalid?

similar to how the contract methods are in the [contracts namespace](https://developers.flow.com/cadence/language/accounts).

The `AuthAccount` would get new methods to create or get or iterate through capabilities,
and to get or iterate through CapCons in order to manage capabilities. 
Methods used for (un)linking would be removed as they are no longer needed.

```cadence
struct AuthAccount {
    // ...
    // removed: fun link<T: &Any>(_ newCapabilityPath: CapabilityPath, target: Path): Capability<T>?
    // removed: fun getLinkTarget(_ path: CapabilityPath): Path?
    // removed: fun unlink(_ path: CapabilityPath)
    // moved & renamed: fun getCapability<T>(_ path: CapabilityPath): Capability<T>
    // moved & renamed: fun forEachPublic(_ function: ((PublicPath, Type): Bool))

    let capabilities: AuthAccount.Capabilities

    struct Capabilities {
        /// get returns the capability at the public path, if one was stored there.
        fun get<T>(_ path: PublicPath): Capability<T>?

        /// borrow gets the capability at the given path, and borrows the capability if it exists.

>         /// Returns `nil` if the capability does not exist or cannot be borrowed using the given type.
>         /// The function is equivalent to `get(path)?.borrow()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        /// Returns a reference to the object targeted by the capability.
        ///
        /// If no object is stored at the target path, the function returns nil.
        ///
        /// If there is an object stored, a reference is returned as an optional, provided it can be borrowed using the given type.
        /// If the stored object cannot be borrowed using the given type, the function panics.
        ///
        /// The function is equivalent to `get<T>(path)?.borrow()`.
```

>         fun borrow<T>(_ path: PublicPath): T?

Reviewer 8: `Capability.borrow()` has a constraint on its type parameter: `T: &Any`. Since this is built on top of that mechanism, `Capabilities.borrow` should carry the same type bounds.

Reviewer: Great catch!

Both `AuthAccount.borrow` and `Capability.borrow` already have this type bound, so this new `capabilities.borrow` utility function should have it, too.

```suggestion
        fun borrow<T: &Any>(_ path: PublicPath): T?
```

| status: Proposed
| flip: [798](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/798)

> | author: Janez Podhostnik (janez.podhostnik@dapperlabs.com)
> | updated: 2022-10-18

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| author: Janez Podhostnik (janez.podhostnik@dapperlabs.com), Bastian Müller (bastian@dapperlabs.com)
| updated: 2023-03-24
```

The capability management functions in `AuthAccount` will be grouped in nested objects,
similar to how the contract management functions are in a nested [`contracts` object](https://developers.flow.com/cadence/language/accounts).

Functions related to linking will be removed, as they are no longer needed.

```cadence
struct AuthAccount {
    // ...
    // removed: fun link<T: &Any>(_ newCapabilityPath: CapabilityPath, target: Path): Capability<T>?
    // removed: fun unlink(_ path: CapabilityPath)
    // removed: fun getLinkTarget(_ path: CapabilityPath): Path?
    // moved and renamed: fun getCapability<T: &Any>(_ path: CapabilityPath): Capability<T>

    let storageCapabilities: &AuthAccount.StorageCapabilities
    let accountCapabilities: &AuthAccount.AccountCapabilities

    struct StorageCapabilities {

        /// get returns the storage capability at the given path, if one was stored there.
        fun get<T: &Any>(_ path: PublicPath): Capability<T>?

        /// borrow gets the storage capability at the given path, and borrows the capability if it exists.
        /// Returns nil if the capability does not exist or cannot be borrowed using the given type.

>         /// The function is equivalent to `getCapability(path)?.borrow()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        /// The function is equivalent to `get(path)?.borrow()`.
```

        fun getControllers(forPath: StoragePath): [&StorageCapabilityController]

        /// Iterate through all storage capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path.
        /// Returning false from the function stops the iteration.
        fun forEachController(forPath: StoragePath, function: ((&StorageCapabilityController): Bool))

        /// Issue/create a new storage capability.
        fun issue<T: &Any>(_ path: StoragePath): Capability<T>
    }

     struct AccountCapabilities {

        /// Get capability controller for capability with the specified ID.
        /// Returns nil if the ID does not reference an existing account capability.
        fun getController(byCapabilityID: UInt64): &AccountCapabilityController?

        /// Get all capability controllers for all account capabilities.
        fun getControllers(): [&AccountCapabilityController]

        /// Iterate through all account capability controllers for all account capabilities.
        /// Returning false from the function stops the iteration.
        fun forEachController(_ function: ((&AccountCapabilityController): Bool))

        /// Issue/create a new account capability.

>         fun issue(): Capability<&AuthAccount>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        fun issue<T: &AuthAccount>(): Capability<T>
```

    }
}
```

### PublicAccount Type

```cadence
struct PublicAccount {
    // ...
    // removed: fun getLinkTarget(_ path: CapabilityPath): Path?
    // moved and renamed: fun getCapability<T: &Any>(_ path: PublicPath): Capability<T>

    let storageCapabilities: &PublicAccount.StorageCapabilities

    struct StorageCapabilities {

        /// get returns the storage capability at the given path, if one was stored there.
        fun get<T: &Any>(_ path: PublicPath): Capability<T>?

        /// borrow gets the storage capability at the given path, and borrows the capability if it exists.
        /// Returns nil if the capability does not exist or cannot be borrowed using the given type.

>         /// The function is equivalent to `getCapability(path)?.borrow()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        /// The function is equivalent to `get(path)?.borrow()`.
```

        fun borrow<T: &Any>(_ path: PublicPath): T?
    }
}
```

## Impact of the solution

### Changes for capability consumers

The following pattern:

```cadence
let publicAccount = getAccount(issuerAddress)
let countCap = publicAccount.getCapability<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)
let countRef = countCap.borrow()!
countRef.count
```

Would change to:

```cadence
let publicAccount = getAccount(issuerAddress)

> let countCap = publicAccount.getCapability<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let countCap = publicAccount.storageCapabilities.get<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)!
```

let countRef = countCap.borrow()!
countRef.count
```

> (Note how the `getCapability` function returns an optional now.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Note how the `get` function returns an optional now.)
```

> Or using the `borrowCapability` shorthand:
> 
> ```cadence
> let publicAccount = getAccount(issuerAddress)
> let countRef = publicAccount.borrowCapability<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or using the `borrow` convenience function:

```cadence
let publicAccount = getAccount(issuerAddress)
let countRef = publicAccount.storageCapabilities.borrow<&{HasCount}>(/public/hasCount)!
```

        pub fun borrow<T: &Any>(_ path: PublicPath): T?

        /// Publish the capability at the given public path.
        ///
        /// If there is already a capability published under the given path, the program aborts.
        ///
        /// The path must be a public path, i.e., only the domain `public` is allowed.
        pub fun publish(_ capability: Capability, at: PublicPath)

        /// Unpublish the capability published at the given path.
        ///
        /// Returns the capability if one was published at the path.
        /// Returns nil if no capability was published at the path.
        pub fun unpublish(_ path: PublicPath): Capability?
    }

    pub struct StorageCapabilities {

        /// Get the storage capability controller for the capability with the specified ID.
        /// Returns nil if the ID does not reference an existing storage capability.
        pub fun getController(byCapabilityID: UInt64): &StorageCapabilityController?

        /// Get all storage capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path
        pub fun getControllers(forPath: StoragePath): [&StorageCapabilityController]

> 
>         /// Iterate through all storage capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path.
>         /// Returning false from the function stops the iteration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

        /// Iterate over all storage capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path,
        /// passing a reference to each controller to the provided callback function.
        ///
        /// Iteration is stopped early if the callback function returns `false`.
        ///
        /// If a new storage capability controller is issued for the path,
        /// an existing storage capability controller for the path is deleted,
        /// or a storage capability controller is retargeted from or to the path,
        /// then the callback must stop iteration by returning false.
        /// Otherwise, iteration aborts.
```

        pub fun forEachController(forPath: StoragePath, _ function: ((&StorageCapabilityController): Bool))

        /// Issue/create a new storage capability.
        pub fun issue<T: &Any>(_ path: StoragePath): Capability<T>
    }

    pub struct AccountCapabilities {

        /// Get capability controller for capability with the specified ID.
        /// Returns nil if the ID does not reference an existing account capability.
        pub fun getController(byCapabilityID: UInt64): &AccountCapabilityController?

        /// Get all capability controllers for all account capabilities.
        pub fun getControllers(): [&AccountCapabilityController]

>         /// Iterate through all account capability controllers for all account capabilities.
>         /// Returning false from the function stops the iteration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        /// Iterate over all account capability controllers for all account capabilities,
        /// passing a reference to each controller to the provided callback function.
        ///
        /// Iteration is stopped early if the callback function returns `false`.
        ///
        /// If a new account capability controller is issued for the account,
        /// or an existing account capability controller for the account is deleted,
        /// then the callback must stop iteration by returning false.
        /// Otherwise, iteration aborts.
```

> | status: Proposed
> | flip: [798](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/798)
> | author: Janez Podhostnik (janez.podhostnik@dapperlabs.com), Bastian Müller (bastian@dapperlabs.com)
> | updated: 2023-05-04

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| status: Accepted
| flip: [798](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/798)
| author: Janez Podhostnik (janez.podhostnik@dapperlabs.com), Bastian Müller (bastian@dapperlabs.com)
| updated: 2023-05-12
```

CapCons are not storable (similar to e.g. AuthAccounts).

There are two kinds of capabilities:
- Storage capability: Targets a storage path in an account
- Account capabilities: Targets an account.
  This kind was introduced in [FLIP 53](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/53).

Therefore, there are two kinds of Capability Controllers:
`StorageCapabilityController` and `AccountCapabilityController`.

```cadence
pub struct StorageCapabilityController {

    /// The type of the controlled capability, i.e. the T in `Capability<T>`.
    pub let borrowType: Type

    /// The identifier of the controlled capability.
    /// All copies of a capability have the same ID.
    pub let capabilityID: UInt64

    /// Delete this capability controller,
    /// and disable the controlled capability and its copies.
    ///
    /// The controller will be deleted from storage,
    /// but the controlled capability and its copies remain.
    ///
    /// Once this function returns, the controller is no longer usable,
    /// all further operations on the controller will panic.
    ///
    /// Borrowing from the controlled capability or its copies will return nil.
    ///

>     pub fun delete()

Reviewer 9: Above, you say that capcons aren't storable, but you say this deletes it from storage. I'm a little confused what this is referring to. The same comment applies to the one for the account capability controller as well

Reviewer: Good point, I'll clarify the wording. 

Capability controllers are stored in the account's storage, but are not a first-class value that can be e.g. stored inside another value or saved into account storage using `save` – the execution environment manages the creation, storage, and deletion itself.

Initially, the FLIP proposed that capability controllers could be accessed as a value, i.e. a program would work with e.g a `StorageCapabilityController`, similar to how transactions work with `AuthAccount` values.
However, that would have meant that a user could attempt to e.g. store it inside of another value or store it into the account storage with the `save` function. For this purpose, Cadence as a built-in notion of "Storable", and e.g. `AuthAccount` is not a storable type.

However, we can simply enforce the same restriction by not giving out full values of the controller, but just a reference – references are not storable.

Reviewer: Clarified this in 0c34ed40464b162ba9a6f85291ff3ab4ef953935

    /// Returns the targeted storage path of the controlled capability.
    pub fun target(): StoragePath

>     /// Retarget the capability.
>     /// This moves the CapCon from one CapCon array to another.
>     pub fun retarget(target: StoragePath)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Retarget the controlled capability to the given storage path.
    /// The path may be different or the same as the current path.
    pub fun retarget(_ target: StoragePath)
```

```cadence
pub struct AuthAccount {
    // ...
    // removed: fun link<T: &Any>(_ newCapabilityPath: CapabilityPath, target: Path): Capability<T>?
    // removed: fun unlink(_ path: CapabilityPath)
    // removed: fun getLinkTarget(_ path: CapabilityPath): Path?
    // moved and renamed:
    //   old: fun getCapability<T: &Any>(_ path: CapabilityPath): Capability<T>
    //   new: fun Capabilities.get<T: &Any>(_ path: CapabilityPath): Capability<T>?

    pub let capabilities: &AuthAccount.Capabilities

    pub struct Capabilities {

        pub let storage: &AuthAccount.StorageCapabilities
        pub let account: &AuthAccount.AccountCapabilities

        /// Returns the capability at the given public path.
        /// Returns nil if the capability does not exist,
        /// or if the given type is not a supertype of the capability's borrow type.
        pub fun get<T: &Any>(_ path: PublicPath): Capability<T>?

        /// Borrows the capability at the given public path.
        /// Returns nil if the capability does not exist, or cannot be borrowed using the given type.
        /// The function is equivalent to `get(path)?.borrow()`.

>         pub fun borrow<T: &Any>(_ path: PublicPath): T?

Reviewer: The `get` and `borrow` function here (in `AuthAccount.Capabilities`), can be used for both storage and account capabilities.

        ///
        /// The path must be a public path, i.e., only the domain `public` is allowed.
        pub fun publish(_ capability: Capability, at: PublicPath)

        /// Unpublish the capability published at the given path.
        ///
        /// Returns the capability if one was published at the path.
        /// Returns nil if no capability was published at the path.
        pub fun unpublish(_ path: PublicPath): Capability?
    }

    pub struct StorageCapabilities {

        /// Get the storage capability controller for the capability with the specified ID.
        /// Returns nil if the ID does not reference an existing storage capability.
        pub fun getController(byCapabilityID: UInt64): &StorageCapabilityController?

        /// Get all storage capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path
        pub fun getControllers(forPath: StoragePath): [&StorageCapabilityController]

        /// Iterate through all storage capability controllers for capabilities that target this storage path.
        /// Returning false from the function stops the iteration.

>         pub fun forEachController(forPath: StoragePath, function: ((&StorageCapabilityController): Bool))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        pub fun forEachController(forPath: StoragePath, _ function: ((&StorageCapabilityController): Bool))
```

        /// Issue/create a new storage capability.
        pub fun issue<T: &Any>(_ path: StoragePath): Capability<T>
    }

    pub struct AccountCapabilities {

        /// Get capability controller for capability with the specified ID.
        /// Returns nil if the ID does not reference an existing account capability.
        pub fun getController(byCapabilityID: UInt64): &AccountCapabilityController?

        /// Get all capability controllers for all account capabilities.
        pub fun getControllers(): [&AccountCapabilityController]

        /// Iterate through all account capability controllers for all account capabilities.
        /// Returning false from the function stops the iteration.
        pub fun forEachController(_ function: ((&AccountCapabilityController): Bool))

        /// Issue/create a new account capability.

>         pub fun issue<T: &AuthAccount>(): Capability<T>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        pub fun issue<T: &AuthAccount{}>(): Capability<T>
```
